---
title: VAST 2020.04.29
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.04.29
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.04.29).

### Features

#### PRs 827-844

Packet drop and discard statistics are now reported to the accountant for PCAP
import, and are available using the keys `pcap-reader.recv`, `pcap-reader.drop`,
`pcap-reader.ifdrop`, `pcap-reader.discard`, and `pcap-reader.discard-rate` in
the `vast.statistics` event. If the number of dropped packets exceeds a
configurable threshold, VAST additionally warns about packet drops on the
command line.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#827](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/827).

#### Add Bash autocompletion for VAST

Bash autocompletion for `vast` is now available via the autocomplete script
located at `scripts/vast-completions.bash` in the VAST source tree.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#833](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/833).

### Changes

#### Rename count.skip-candidate-checks to count.estimate

The option `--skip-candidate-checks` / `-s` for the `count` command was renamed
to `--estimate` / `-e`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#843](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/843).

#### Change default listen address to 'localhost'

The default bind address has been changed from `::` to `localhost`.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#828](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/828).

#### Simplify partition structure

The index specific options `max-partition-size`, `max-resident-partitions`,
`max-taste-partitions`, and `max-queries` can now be specified on the command
line when starting a node.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#728](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/728).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix meta index nondeterminism

For some queries, the index evaluated only a subset of all relevant partitions
in a non-deterministic manner. Fixing a violated evaluation invariant now
guarantees deterministic execution.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#842](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/842).

#### Use line reader timeout

Fixed a bug that could cause stalled input streams not to forward events to the
index and archive components for the JSON, CSV, and Syslog readers, when the
input stopped arriving but no EOF was sent. This is a follow-up to
[#750](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/750). A timeout now ensures that that
the readers continue when some events were already handled, but the input
appears to be stalled.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#835](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/835).

#### Fix inequality port lookups

Queries of the form `x != 80/tcp` were falsely evaluated as `x != 80/? && x !=
?/tcp`. (The syntax in the second predicate does not yet exist; it only
illustrates the bug.) Port inequality queries now correctly evaluate `x != 80/?
|| x != ?/tcp`. E.g., the result now contains values like `80/udp` and `80/?`,
but also `8080/tcp`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#834](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/834).

#### Make archive session extraction interruptible

Archive lookups are now interruptible. This change fixes an issue that caused
consecutive exports to slow down the node, which improves the overall
performance for larger databases considerably.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#825](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/825).

#### Remove assertion from expression tailoring

Fixed a crash when importing data while a continuous export was running for
unrelated events.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#830](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/830).

#### Make stop command blocking and return properly

The `stop` command always returned immediately, regardless of whether it
succeeded. It now blocks until the remote node shut down properly or returns an
error exit code upon failure.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#849](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/849).
