---
title: VAST 2020.09.30
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.09.30
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.09.30).

### Features

#### Restructure vast status

The output of the `status` command was restructured with a strong focus on
usability. The new flags `--detailed` and `--debug` add additional content to
the output.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#995](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/995).

#### Flatbufferize index

VAST now ships with a new tool `lsvast` to display information about the
contents of a VAST database directory. See `lsvast --help` for usage
instructions.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#863](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/863).

#### Merge contents of all configuration files

VAST now merges the contents of all used configuration files instead of using
only the most user-specific file. The file specified using `--config` takes the
highest precedence, followed by the user-specific path
`${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-${HOME}/.config}/vast/vast.conf`, and the compile-time path
`<sysconfdir>/vast/vast.conf`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1040](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1040).

#### Add a get subcommand to retrieve events from the archive directly

The `vast get` command has been added. It retrieves events from the database
directly by their ids.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#938](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/938).

#### Make vast.conf lookup on Linux systems more intuitive

VAST now supports the XDG base directory specification: The `vast.conf` is now
found at `${XDG_CONFIG_HOME:-${HOME}/.config}/vast/vast.conf`, and schema files
at `${XDG_DATA_HOME:-${HOME}/.local/share}/vast/schema/`. The user-specific
configuration file takes precedence over the global configuration file in
`<sysconfdir>/vast/vast.conf`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1036](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1036).

### Changes

#### PRs 1045-1055-1059-1062

The proprietary VAST configuration file has changed to the more ops-friendly
industry standard YAML. This change introduced also a new dependency:
[yaml-cpp](https://github.com/jbeder/yaml-cpp) version 0.6.2 or greater. The
top-level `vast.yaml.example` illustrates how the new YAML config looks like.
Please rename existing configuration files from `vast.conf` to `vast.yaml`.
VAST still reads `vast.conf` but will soon only look for `vast.yaml` or
`vast.yml` files in available configuration file paths.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1045](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1045).

#### Add event type name to the record batch metadata

Data exported in the Apache Arrow format now contains the name of the payload
record type in the metadata section of the schema.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1072](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1072).

#### Render duration and port as JSON strings

The JSON export format now renders `duration` and `port` fields using strings as
opposed to numbers. This avoids a possible loss of information and enables users
to re-use the output in follow-up queries directly.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1034](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1034).

#### Make periodic logging more sensible

The delay between the periodic log messages for reporting the current event
rates has been increased to 10 seconds.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1035](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1035).

#### Make vast.conf lookup on Linux systems more intuitive

The global VAST configuration now always resides in
`<sysconfdir>/vast/vast.conf`, and bundled schemas always in
`<datadir>/vast/schema/`. VAST no longer supports reading a `vast.conf` file in
the current working directory.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1036](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1036).

#### Flatbufferize index

The persistent storage format of the index now uses FlatBuffers.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#863](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/863).

#### Improve import batching options

The options that affect batches in the `import` command received new, more
user-facing names: `import.table-slice-type`, `import.table-slice-size`, and
`import.read-timeout` are now called `import.batch-encoding`,
`import.batch-size`, and `import.read-timeout` respectively.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1058](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1058).

#### Flatbufferize index

We refactored the index architecture to improve stability and responsiveness.
This includes fixes for several shutdown issues.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#863](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/863).

#### Restructure configuration file hierarchy

All configuration options are now grouped into `vast` and `caf` sections,
depending on whether they affect VAST itself or are handed through to the
underlying actor framework CAF directly. Take a look at the bundled
`vast.yaml.example` file for an explanation of the new layout.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1073](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1073).

### Bug Fixes

#### Improve import batching options

Stalled sources that were unable to generate new events no longer stop import
processes from shutting down under rare circumstances.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1058](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1058).
