---
title: VAST 2020.12.16
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.12.16
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.12.16).

### Features

#### PRs 1196-1233

The new `dump` command prints configuration and schema-related information. The
implementation allows for printing all registered concepts and models, via `vast
dump concepts` and `vast dump models`. The flag to `--yaml` to `dump` switches
from JSON to YAML output, such that it confirms to the taxonomy configuration
syntax.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1196](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1196).

#### Add support for type-level synopses and a string synopsis

Low-selectivity queries of string (in)equality queries now run up to 30x faster,
thanks to more intelligent selection of relevant index partitions.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1214](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1214).

#### Add support for USDT tracepoints in VAST

On Linux, VAST now contains a set of built-in USDT tracepoints that can be used
by tools like `perf` or `bpftrace` when debugging. Initially, we provide the two
tracepoints `chunk_make` and `chunk_destroy`, which trigger every time a
`vast::chunk` is created or destroyed.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1206](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1206).

#### PRs 1135-1150

VAST now ships with its own taxonomy and basic concept definitions for Suricata,
Zeek, and Sysmon.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1135](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1135).

#### Show file size information in lsvast

The new option `--print-bytesizes` of `lsvast` prints information about the size
of certain fields of the flatbuffers inside a VAST database directory.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1149](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1149).

#### Introduce the #field meta extractor

The expression language gained support for the `#field` meta extractor. It is
the complement for `#type` and uses suffix matching for field names at the
layout level.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1228](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1228).

#### PRs 1172-1200-1216

The storage required for index IP addresses has been optimized. This should
 result in significantly reduced memory usage over time, as well as faster
 restart times and reduced disk space requirements.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1172](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1172).

#### Allow for enabling client file logging

The new option `vast.client-log-file` enables client-side logging. By default,
VAST only writes log files for the server process.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1132](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1132).

#### Show meta index size in vast status

A new key 'meta-index-bytes' appears in the status output generated by `vast
status --detailed`.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1193](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1193).

#### PRs 1185-1228

The query language now supports models. Models combine a list of concepts into a
semantic unit that can be fulfiled by an event. If the type of an event contains
a field for every concept in a model. Turn to [the
documentation](https://vast.io/docs/understand/data-model/taxonomies#models)
for more information.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1185](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1185).

### Changes

#### Make Zeek writer work with all data types

The `zeek` export format now strips off the prefix `zeek.` to ensure full
compatibility with regular Zeek output. For all non-Zeek types, the prefix
remains intact.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1205](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1205).

#### Process schema directories recursively

VAST now processes the schema directory recursively, as opposed to stopping at
nested directories.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1154](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1154).

#### Make metrics opt-in

VAST does not produce metrics by default any more. The option
`--disable-metrics` has been renamed to `--enable-metrics` accordingly.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1137](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1137).

#### PRs 1176-1180-1186-1237-satta

The Suricata schemas received an overhaul: there now exist `vlan` and `in_iface`
fields in all types. In addition, VAST ships with new types for `ikev2`, `nfs`,
`snmp`, `tftp`, `rdp`, `sip` and `dcerpc`. The `tls` type gets support for the
additional `sni` and `session_resumed` fields.

By [@satta](https://github.com/satta) in [#1176](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1176).

#### Move schema definitions into subdirectory

Installed schema definitions now reside in `<datadir>/vast/schema/types`,
taxonomy definitions in `<datadir>/vast/schema/taxonomy`, and concept
definitions in `<datadir/vast/schema/concepts`, as opposed to them all being in
the schema directory directly. When overriding an existing installation, you
_may_ have to delete the old schema definitions by hand.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1194](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1194).

#### Set fallback port for underspecified endpoints

VAST now listens on port 42000 instead of letting the operating system choose
the port if the option `vast.endpoint` specifies an endpoint without a port. To
restore the old behavior, set the port to 0 explicitly.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1170](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1170).

#### Fulfill Deployment Requirements

The build configuration of VAST received a major overhaul. Inclusion of libvast
in other procects via `add_subdirectory(path/to/vast)` is now easily possible.
The names of all build options were aligned, and the new build summary shows all
available options.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1175](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1175).

#### Replace PID file if process does not exist

VAST no longer requires you to manually remove a stale PID file from a no-longer
running `vast` process. Instead, VAST prints a warning and overwrites the old
PID file.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1128](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1128).

#### PRs 1143-1157-1160-1165

The on-disk format for table slices now supports versioning of table slice
encodings. This breaking change makes it so that adding further encodings or
adding new versions of existing encodings is possible without breaking again in
the future.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1143](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1143).

#### Generalize splunk-to-vast

The `splunk-to-vast` script has a new name: `taxonomize`. The script now also
generates taxonomy declarations for Azure Sentinel.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1134](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1134).

#### Remove port type

The `port` type is no longer a first-class type. The new way to represent
transport-layer ports relies on `count` instead. In the schema, VAST ships with
a new alias `type port = count` to keep existing schema definitions in tact.
However, this is a breaking change because the on-disk format and Arrow data
representation changed. Queries with `:port` type extractors no longer work.
Similarly, the syntax `53/udp` no longer exists; use `count` syntax `53`
instead. Since most `port` occurrences do not carry a known transport-layer
type, and the type information exists typically in a separate field, removing
`port` as native type streamlines the data model.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1187](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1187).

#### Remove Version FlatBuffers table

Archive segments no longer include an additional, unnecessary version
identifier. We took the opportunity to clean this up bundled with the other
recent breaking changes.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1168](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1168).

#### Remove CAF-encoded table slices

CAF-encoded table slices no longer exist. As such, the option
`vast.import.batch-encoding` now only supports `arrow` and `msgpack` as
arguments.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1142](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1142).

#### Increase the default segment size to 1 GiB

The default segment size in the archive is now 1 GiB. This reduces fragmentation
of the archive meta data and speeds up VAST startup time.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1166](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1166).

### Bug Fixes

#### Reply to status requests in sinks

The output of `vast status --detailed` now contains informations about runnings
sinks, e.g., `vast export <format> <query>` processes.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1155](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1155).

#### Send correct message to index when dropping further results

The index now correctly drops further results when queries finish early, thus
improving the performance of queries for a limited number of events.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1209](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1209).

#### Error when specified config file does not exist

VAST no longer starts if the specified config file does not exist.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1147](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1147).

#### Introduce the #field meta extractor

The summary log message of `vast export` now contains the correct number of
candidate events.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1228](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1228).

#### Fix index worker depletion

The index no longer causes exporters to deadlock when the meta index produces
false positives.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1225](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1225).

#### Fix YAML syntax errors in example config

The `vast.yaml.example` contained syntax errors. The example config file now
works again.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1145](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1145).

#### Fix loading and dumping of composed concepts

Concepts that reference other concepts are now loaded correctly from their
definition.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1236](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1236).

#### Detect and handle breaking changes in schemas

The type registry now detects and handles breaking changes in schemas, e.g.,
when a field type changes or a field is dropped from record.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1195](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1195).

#### Fix a hang when trying to process an invalid query

VAST no longer blocks when an invalid query operation is issued.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1189](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1189).

#### Fix a bug that causes sources to stall

`vast import` no longer stalls when it doesn't receive any data for more than 10
seconds.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1136](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1136).

#### Don't collect status from sources and sinks

The `vast status` command does not collect status information from sources and
sinks any longer. They were often too busy to respond, leading to a long delay
before the command completed.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1234](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1234).

#### Switch index behavior when running out of workers

The index no longer crashes when too many parallel queries are running.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1210](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1210).
