---
title: VAST 2020.10.29
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.10.29
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.10.29).

### Features

#### Age rotation for old data

The new options `vast.segments` and `vast.max-segment-size` control how the
archive generates segments.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1103](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1103).

#### Enable loading of concepts from disk

The query language now comes with support for concepts, the first part of
taxonomies. Concepts is a mechanism to unify the various naming schemes of
different data formats into a single, coherent nomenclature.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1102](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1102).

#### Allow tuple-style syntax for parsing records

The expression language now accepts records without field names. For example,`id
== <192.168.0.1, 41824, 143.51.53.13, 25, "tcp">` is now valid syntax and
instantiates a record with 5 fields. Note: expressions with records currently do
not execute.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1129](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1129).

#### Add script to convert CIM to VAST taxonomy

The new script `splunk-to-vast` converts a splunk CIM model file in JSON to a
VAST taxonomy. For example, `splunk-to-vast < Network_Traffic.json` renders the
concept definitions for the *Network Traffic* datamodel. The generated taxonomy
does not include field definitions, which users should add separately according
to their data formats.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1121](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1121).

#### Support native systemd startup notification from VAST

When running VAST under systemd supervision, it is now possible to use the
`Type=notify` directive in the unit file to let VAST notify the service manager
when it becomes ready.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1091](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1091).

#### Age rotation for old data

A new *disk monitor* component can now monitor the database size and delete data
that exceeds a specified threshold. Once VAST reaches the maximum amount of disk
space, the disk monitor deletes the oldest data. The command-line options
`--disk-quota-high`, `--disk-quota-low`, and `--disk-quota-check-interval`
control the rotation behavior.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1103](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1103).

### Changes

#### Make default log format less verbose

Log files are now less verbose because class and function names are not printed
on every line.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1107](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1107).

#### Make the source actor more responsive

The new option `import.read-timeout` allows for setting an input timeout for low
volume sources. Reaching the timeout causes the current batch to be forwarded
immediately. This behavior was previously controlled by `import.batch-timeout`,
which now only controls the maximum buffer time before the source forwards
batches to the server.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1096](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1096).

#### Change /var/db to /var/lib on Linux deployments

The default database directory moved to `/var/lib/vast` for Linux deployments.

By [@0snap](https://github.com/0snap) in [#1116](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1116).

#### Warn on client-server version mismatch

VAST will now warn if a client command connects to a server that runs on a
different version of the vast binary.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1098](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1098).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix merging of source status objects

The `vast status --detailed` command now correctly shows the status of all
sources, i.e., `vast import` or `vast spawn source` commands.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1109](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1109).

#### Fix file identifier check in lsvast

The `lsvast` tool failed to print FlatBuffers schemas correctly. The output now
renders correctly.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1123](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1123).

#### Use a stable set for schema directories

The lookup for schema directories now happens in a fixed order.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1086](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1086).

#### Don't enable automatic connections by default

VAST no longer opens a random public port, which used to be enabled in the
experimental VAST cluster mode in order to transparently establish a full mesh.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1110](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1110).

#### Make the source actor more responsive

Sources that receive no or very little input do not block `vast status` any
longer.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1096](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1096).
