---
title: VAST 2020.05.28
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.05.28
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.05.28).

### Features

#### Support `
`-style newlines in VAST

All input parsers now support mixed `\n` and `\r\n` line endings.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#865](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/865).

#### Deduce types for heterogenous JSONL import

When importing events of a new or updated type, VAST now only requires the type
to be specified once (e.g., in a schema file). For consecutive imports, the
event type does not need to be specified again. A list of registered types can
now be viewed using `vast status` under the key `node.type-registry.types`.

When importing JSON data without knowing the type of the imported events a
priori, VAST now supports automatic event type deduction based on the JSON
object keys in the data. VAST selects a type _iff_ the set of fields match a
known type. The `--type` / `-t` option to the `import` command restricts the
matching to the set of types that share the provided prefix. Omitting `-t`
attempts to match JSON against all known types. If only a single variant of a
type is matched, the import falls back to the old behavior and fills in `nil`
for mismatched keys.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#875](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/875).

#### UX improvements for `read_query()`

VAST now prints a message when it is waiting for user input to read a query from
a terminal.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#878](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/878).

#### Publish Sysmon schema

VAST now ships with a schema suitable for Sysmon import.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#886](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/886).

#### PRs 873-877

Added a new `explore` command to VAST that can be used to show data records
within a certain time from the results of a query.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#873](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/873).

### Changes

#### Rename statistics event to metrics

The command line flag for disabling the accountant has been renamed to
`--disable-metrics` to more accurately reflect its intended purpose. The
internal `vast.statistics` event has been renamed to `vast.metrics`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#870](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/870).

#### UX improvements for `read_query()`

Spreading a query over multiple command line arguments in commands like
explore/export/pivot/etc. has been deprecated.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#878](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/878).

### Bug Fixes

#### Correct check for user schema in zeek reader

The parser for Zeek tsv data used to ignore attributes that were defined for the
Zeek-specific types in the schema files. It has been modified to respect and
prefer the specified attributes for the fields that are present in the input
data.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#847](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/847).

#### Various config and default setting fixes

Fixed a bug that caused `vast import` processes to produce `'default'` table
slices, despite having the `'arrow'` type as the default.

Fixed a bug where setting the `logger.file-verbosity` in the config file would
not have an effect.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#866](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/866).
