---
title: VAST 2020.08.28
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.08.28
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.08.28).

### Features

#### Always convert JSON null to VAST nil

The default schema for Suricata has been updated to support the `suricata.ftp`
and `suricata.ftp_data` event types.

VAST now prints the location of the configuration file that is used.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1009](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1009).

#### Protect DB directory with PID lock

VAST now writes a PID lock file on startup to prevent multiple server processes
from accessing the same persistent state. The `pid.lock` file resides in the
`vast.db` directory.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1001](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1001).

### Changes

#### Rename vector to list

The `vector` type has been renamed to `list`. In an effort to streamline the
type system vocabulary, we favor `list` over `vector` because it's closer to
existing terminology (e.g., Apache Arrow). This change requires updating
existing schemas by changing `vector<T>` to `list<T>`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1016](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1016).

#### Allow the '-' in the expression key parser

The expression field parser now allows the '-' character.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#999](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/999).

#### Remove set data type

The `set` type has been removed. Experience with the data model showed that
there is no strong use case to separate sets from vectors in the core. While
this may be useful in programming languages, VAST deals with immutable data
where set constraints have been enforced upstream. This change requires updating
existing schemas by changing `set<T>` to `vector<T>`. In the query language, the
new symbol for the empty `map` changed from `{-}` to `{}`, as it now
unambiguously identifies `map` instances.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1010](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1010).

#### Expand CAF stream slot ids to 32 bits

We now bundle a patched version of CAF, with a changed ABI. This means that if
you're linking against the bundled CAF library, you also need to distribute that
library so that VAST can use it at runtime. The versions are API compatible so
linking against a system version of CAF is still possible and supported.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1020](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1020).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix bug in decoding multi-object MsgPack types

MessagePack-encoded table slices now work correctly for nested container types.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#984](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/984).

#### Expand CAF stream slot ids to 32 bits

When running VAST under heavy load, CAF stream slot ids could wrap around after
a few days and deadlock the system. As a workaround, we extended the slot id bit
width to make the time until this happens unrealistically large.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1020](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1020).

#### Allow the '-' in the expression key parser

A bug in the expression parser prevented the correct parsing of fields starting
with either 'F' or 'T'.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#999](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/999).

#### Terminate exporters when sinks die

When continuous query in a client process terminated, the node did not clean up
the corresponding server-side state. This memory leak no longer exists.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1006](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1006).

#### Support hard-kill for unresponsive actors

The shutdown process of the server process could potentially hang forever. VAST
now uses a 2-step procedure that first attempts to terminate all components
cleanly. If that fails, it will attempt a hard kill afterwards, and if that
fails after another timeout, the process will call `abort(3)`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1005](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1005).

#### Make port-encoding for Arrow host-independent

The port encoding for Arrow-encoded table slices is now host-independent and
 always uses network-byte order.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1007](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1007).

#### Close file descriptor by default in 'vast::file'

Some file descriptors remained open when they weren't needed any more. This
descriptor leak has been fixed.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1018](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1018).

#### Always convert JSON null to VAST nil

Importing JSON no longer fails for JSON fields containing `null` when the
corresponding VAST type in the schema is a non-trivial type like
`vector<string>`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1009](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1009).

#### Correct the use of ::read()

Incomplete reads have not been handled properly, which manifested for files
larger than 2GB. On macOS, writing files larger than 2GB may have failed
previously. VAST now respects OS-specific constraints on the maximum block size.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1025](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1025).

#### Shutdown node when component startup fails

VAST did not terminate when a critical component failed during startup. VAST
now binds the lifetime of the node to all critical components.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1028](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1028).

#### Don't overwrite index state after startup error

VAST would overwrite existing on-disk state data when encountering a partial
read during startup. This state-corrupting behavior no longer exists.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1026](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1026).
