---
title: VAST 2020.03.26
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.03.26
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.03.26).

### Features

#### Use heterogenous lookup for hash index

The hash index has been re-enabled after it was outfitted with a new
[high-performance hash map](https://github.com/Tessil/robin-map/) implementation
that increased performance to the point where it is on par with the regular
index.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#796](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/796).

#### Require end-of-input to be reached for range-based parser invocations

An under-the-hood change to our parser-combinator framework makes sure that we
do not discard possibly invalid input data up the the end of input. This
uncovered a bug in our MRT/bgpdump integrations, which have thus been disabled
(for now), and will be fixed at a later point in time.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#808](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/808).

#### Fix user shutdown handling for continuous exports

Continuous export processes can now be stopped correctly. Before this change,
the node showed an error message and the exporting process exited with a
non-zero exit code.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#779](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/779).

#### Implement reader for Syslog RFC5424

The new `vast import syslog` command allows importing Syslog messages as defined
in [RFC5424](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5424).

By [@knapperzbusch](https://github.com/knapperzbusch) in [#770](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/770).

#### Remove -c short option for setting config file

The short option `-c` for setting the configuration file has been removed. The
long option `--config` must now be used instead. This fixed a bug that did not
allow for `-c` to be used for continuous exports.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#781](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/781).

#### Allow disabling Community ID computation for PCAPs

The option `--disable-community-id` has been added to the `vast import pcap`
command for disabling the automatic computation of Community IDs.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#777](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/777).

#### Require expressions to be parsed to end-of-input

Expressions must now be parsed to the end of input. This fixes a bug that caused
malformed queries to be evaluated until the parser failed. For example, the
query `#type == "suricata.http" && .dest_port == 80` was erroneously evaluated
as `#type == "suricata.http"` instead.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#791](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/791).

### Changes

#### Rename vast.account event type to vast.statistics

The internal statistics event type `vast.account` has been renamed to
`vast.statistics` for clarity.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#789](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/789).

#### Add timestamp attribute to statistics ts field

The config option `system.log-directory` was deprecated and replaced by the new
 option `system.log-file`. All logs will now be written to a single file.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#806](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/806).

#### Restrict log file creation to 'vast start'

The log folder `vast.log/` in the current directory will not be created by
 default any more. Users must explicitly set the `system.file-verbosity` option
 if they wish to keep the old behavior.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#803](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/803).

#### Introduce the VERBOSE log level

The VERBOSE log level has been added between INFO and DEBUG. This level is
enabled at build time for all build types, making it possible to get more
detailed logging output from release builds.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#787](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/787).

#### Replace 'caf#' prefix for CAF options with 'caf.'

The command line options prefix for changing CAF options was changed from
`--caf#` to `--caf.`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#797](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/797).
