---
title: VAST 2020.01.31
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.01.31
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.01.31).

### Features

#### Add -c as shorthand for --config

The long option `--config`, which sets an explicit path to the VAST
configuration file, now also has the short option `-c`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#689](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/689).

#### PRs 632-726

When a record field has the `#index=hash` attribute, VAST will choose an
optimized index implementation. This new index type only supports (in)equality
queries and is therefore intended to be used with opaque types, such as unique
identifiers or random strings.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#632](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/632).

#### Add support for Apache Arrow

Added *Apache Arrow* as new export format. This allows users to export query
results as Apache Arrow record batches for processing the results downstream,
e.g., in Python or Spark.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#633](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/633).

#### Allow configuring pcap snapshot length

The `import pcap` command now takes an optional snapshot length via `--snaplen`.
If the snapshot length is set to snaplen, and snaplen is less than the size of a
packet that is captured, only the first snaplen bytes of that packet will be
captured and provided as packet data.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#642](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/642).

#### Add FreeBSD rc.d script

On FreeBSD, a VAST installation now includes an rc.d script that simpliefies
spinning up a VAST node. CMake installs the script at `PREFIX/etc/rc.d/vast`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#693](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/693).

#### Add Python module for submitting queries to VAST

An experimental new Python module enables querying VAST and processing results
as [pyarrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/python/) tables.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#685](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/685).

### Changes

#### Add Python module for submitting queries to VAST

Record field names can now be entered as quoted strings in the schema and
expression languages. This lifts a restriction where JSON fields with
whitespaces or special characters could not be ingested.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#685](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/685).

#### Minor parser changes

Two minor modifications were done in the parsing framework: (i) the parsers for
enums and records now allow trailing separators, and (ii) the dash (`-`) was
removed from the allowed characters of schema type names.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#706](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/706).

#### Add separate interface option for import pcap

The `import pcap` command no longer takes interface names via `--read,-r`, but
instead from a separate option named `--interface,-i`. This change has been made
for consistency with other tools.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#641](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/641).

#### Switch to a calendar-based versioning scheme

VAST is switching to a calendar-based versioning scheme starting with this
release.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#739](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/739).

#### Perform pass over build config defaults

Build configuration defaults have been adapated for a better user experience.
Installations are now relocatable by default, which can be reverted by
configuring with `--without-relocatable`. Additionally, new sets of defaults
named `--release` and `--debug` (renamed from `--dev-mode`) have been added.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#695](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/695).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix configuration file option parsing

The example configuration file contained an invalid section `vast`. This has
been changed to the correct name `system`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#705](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/705).

#### Fix datagram source actor not running heartbeat

The import process did not print statistics when importing events over UDP.
Additionally, warnings about dropped UDP packets are no longer shown per packet,
but rather periodically reported in a readable format.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#662](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/662).

#### Fix race in index lookup

A race condition in the index logic was able to lead to incomplete or empty
result sets for `vast export`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#703](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/703).

#### Refactor importer initialization

In some cases it was possible that a source would connect to a node before it
was fully initialized, resulting in a hanging `vast import` process.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#647](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/647).

#### Ignore VLAN tags in PCAP import

PCAP ingestion failed for traces containing VLAN tags. VAST now strips [IEEE
802.1Q](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_802.1Q) headers instead of skipping
VLAN-tagged packets.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#650](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/650).

#### Register the accountant for datagram sources

Importing events over UDP with `vast import <format> --listen :<port>/udp`
failed to register the accountant component. This caused an unexpected message
warning to be printed on startup and resulted in losing import statistics. VAST
now correctly registers the accountant.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#655](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/655).

#### Add Python module for submitting queries to VAST

A bug in the quoted string parser caused a parsing failure if an escape
character occurred in the last position.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#685](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/685).
