---
title: VAST 2020.06.25
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2020.06.25
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2020.06.25).

### Features

#### Allow output format selection for the pivot/explore command

The output format for the `explore` and `pivot` commands can now be set using
the `explore.format` and `pivot.format` options respectively. Both default to
JSON.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#921](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/921).

#### Support type relaxation for JSON import

The `import json` command's type restrictions are more relaxed now, and can
additionally convert from JSON strings to VAST internal data types.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#891](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/891).

#### Support /etc/vast/vast.conf as global config

VAST now supports `/etc/vast/vast.conf` as an additional fallback for the
configuration file. The following file locations are looked at in order: Path
specified on the command line via `--config=path/to/vast.conf`, `vast.conf` in
current working directory, `${INSTALL_PREFIX}/etc/vast/vast.conf`, and
`/etc/vast/vast.conf`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#898](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/898).

#### Support aging out data based on a query

VAST now supports aging out existing data. This feature currently only concerns
data in the archive. The options `system.aging-frequency` and
`system.aging-query` configure a query that runs on a regular schedule to
determine which events to delete. It is also possible to trigger an aging cycle
manually.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#929](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/929).

#### Add limit options for vast explore

VAST now has options to limit the amount of results produced by an invocation of
`vast explore`.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#882](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/882).

#### Forcefully emit batches on input timeout error

The `import` command gained a new `--read-timeout` option that forces data to be
forwarded to the importer regardless of the internal batching parameters and
table slices being unfinished. This allows for reducing the latency between the
`import` command and the node. The default timeout is 10 seconds.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#916](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/916).

#### Add Bloom filter meta index

The meta index now uses Bloom filters for equality queries involving IP
addresses. This especially accelerates queries where the user wants to know
whether a certain IP address exists in the entire database.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#931](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/931).

### Changes

#### Rename the 'default' table slice type to 'caf'

The `default` table slice type has been renamed to `caf`. It has not been the
default when built with Apache Arrow support for a while now, and the new name
more accurately reflects what it is doing.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#948](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/948).

#### Print timestamps with full precision for JSON

The JSON export format now renders timestamps using strings instead of numbers
in order to avoid possible loss of precision.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#909](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/909).

#### PRs 908-951

The options `system.table-slice-type` and `system.table-slice-size` have been
removed, as they duplicated `import.table-slice-type` and
`import.table-slice-size` respectively.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#908](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/908).

### Bug Fixes

#### Improve handling of UTF-8 input

The `export json` command now correctly unescapes its output.

VAST now correctly checks for control characters in inputs.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#910](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/910).

#### Simplify id space management

A bogus import process that assembled table slices with a greater number of
events than expected by the node was able to lead to wrong query results.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#908](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/908).

#### Fix use-after-free bug in indexer state

A use after free bug would sometimes crash the node while it was shutting down.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#896](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/896).
