---
title: VAST 2021.03.25
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2021.03.25
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2021.03.25).

### Features

#### PRs 1407-1487-1490

The schema language now supports 4 operations on record types: `+` combines the
fields of 2 records into a new record. `<+` and `+>` are variations of `+` that
give precedence to the left and right operand respectively. `-` creates a record
with the field specified as its right operand removed.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1407](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1407).

#### Support nested records in the Arrow Builder

VAST now supports nested records in Arrow table slices and in the JSON import,
e.g., data of type `list<record<name: string, age: count>`. While nested record
fields are not yet queryable, ingesting such data will no longer cause VAST to
crash. MessagePack table slices don't support records in lists yet.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1429](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1429).

### Changes

#### Move zeek-to-vast from tenzir/vast to tenzir/zeek-vast

The zeek-to-vast utility was moved to the
[tenzir/zeek-vast](https://github.com/tenzir/zeek-vast) repository. All options
related to zeek-to-vast and the bundled Broker submodule were removed.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1435](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1435).

#### PRs 1408-satta

VAST now ships with schema record types for Suricata's `mqtt` and `anomaly`
event types.

By [@satta](https://github.com/satta) in [#1408](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1408).

#### Deprecate the vast.no-default-schema option

The option `vast.no-default-schema` is deprecated, as it is no longer needed to
override types from bundled schemas.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1409](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1409).

#### PRs 1445-1452

Plugins can now be linked statically against VAST. A new `VASTRegisterPlugin`
CMake function enables easy setup of the build scaffolding required for plugins.
Configure with `--with-static-plugins` or build a static binary to link all
plugins built alongside VAST statically. All plugin build scaffoldings must be
adapted, older plugins do no longer work.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1445](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1445).

#### Rename the attribute_extractor to meta_extractor

The previously deprecated `#timestamp` extractor has been removed from the query
language entirely. Use `:timestamp` instead.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1399](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1399).

#### Establish subtyping relationships for type extractors

The type extractor in the expression language now works with type aliases. For
example, given the type definition for port from the base schema `type port =
count`, a search for `:count` will also consider fields of type `port`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1446](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1446).

#### Change the default batch size to 1024

The default size of table slices (event batches) that is created from `vast
import` processes has been changed from 1,000 to 1,024.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1396](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1396).

#### Prune expressions for the meta index lookup

Query latency for expressions that contain concept names has improved
substantially. For DB sizes in the TB region, and with a large variety of event
types, queries with a high selectivity experience speedups of up to 5x.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1433](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1433).

### Bug Fixes

#### Remove erased partitions from the meta index

The disk monitor now correctly erases partition synopses from the meta index.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1450](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1450).

#### Fix printing of non-null intrusive pointers

Some non-null pointers were incorrectly rendered as `*nullptr` in log messages.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1430](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1430).

#### Don't allow field extractors to match field name suffixes

A query for a field or field name suffix that matches multiple fields of
different types would erroneously return no results.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1447](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1447).

#### Fix possibly unhandled exception in disk monitor

VAST no longer crashes when the disk monitor tries to calculate the size of the
database while files are being deleted. Instead, it will retry after the
configured scan interval.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1458](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1458).

#### Make the disk-monitor a singleton component

Enabling the disk budget feature no longer prevents the server process from
exiting after it was stopped.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1495](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1495).

#### Use non-throwing std::filesystem functions in the type registry

Insufficient permissions for one of the paths in the `schema-dirs` option would
lead to a crash in `vast start`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1472](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1472).

#### PRs 1473-1485

A race condition during server shutdown could lead to an invariant violation,
resulting in a firing assertion. Streamlining the shutdown logic resolved the
issue.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1473](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1473).

#### Report metrics while idle

The archive, index, source, and sink components now report metrics when idle
instead of omitting them entirely. This allows for distinguishing between idle
and not running components from the metrics.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1451](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1451).

#### Fix :timestamp queries for old data

Data that was ingested before the deprecation of the `#timestamp` attribute
wasn't exported correctly with newer versions. This is now corrected.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1432](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1432).

#### Accept numbers in place of strings in JSON

The JSON parser now accepts data with numerical or boolean values in fields that
expect strings according to the schema. VAST converts these values into string
representations.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1439](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1439).
