---
title: VAST 2021.04.29
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2021.04.29
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2021.04.29).

### Features

#### Move PCAP import/export into a plugin

*Reader Plugins* and *Writer Plugins* are a new family of plugins that add
import/export formats. The previously optional PCAP format moved into a
dedicated plugin. Configure with `--with-pcap-plugin` and add `pcap` to
`vast.plugins` to enable the PCAP plugin.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1549](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1549).

#### PRs 1532-1541

The `VAST_PLUGIN_DIRS` and `VAST_SCHEMA_DIRS` environment variables allow for
setting additional plugin and schema directories separated with `:` with higher
precedence than other plugin and schema directories.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1532](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1532).

#### Allow for building plugins separately from VAST

It is now possible to build plugins against an installed VAST. This requires a
slight adaptation to every plugin's build scaffolding. The example plugin was
updated accordingly.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1532](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1532).

#### Add '--disk-budget-check-binary' option to disk monitor

The disk monitor gained a new `vast.start.disk-budget-check-binary` option that
can be used to specify an external binary to determine the size of the database
directory. This can be useful in cases where `stat()` does not give the correct
answer, e.g. on compressed filesystems.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1453](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1453).

#### PRs 1544-1547-1588

*Component Plugins* are a new category of plugins that execute code within the
VAST server process. *Analyzer Plugins* are now a specialization of *Component
Plugins*, and their API remains unchanged.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1544](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1544).

### Changes

#### Make the source a regular class

The metrics for Suricata Eve JSON and Zeek Streaming JSON imports are now under
the categories `suricata-reader` and `zeek-reader` respectively so they can be
distinguished from the regular JSON import, which is still under `json-reader`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1498](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1498).

#### Small fixes for projections

The Suricata `dns` schema type now defines the `dns.grouped.A` field containing
a list of all returned addresses.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1531](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1531).

#### Upstream Debian patches

We upstreamed the Debian patches provided by [@satta](https://github.com/satta).
VAST now prefers an installed `tsl-robin-map>=0.6.2` to the bundled one unless
configured with `--with-bundled-robin-map`, and we provide a manpage for
`lsvast` if `pandoc` is installed.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1515](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1515).

#### Remove deprecated no-default-schema option

The previously deprecated ([#1409](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/1409))
option `vast.no-default-schema` no longer exists.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1507](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1507).

#### Use individual files for changelog entries

Building VAST now requires CMake >= 3.15.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1559](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1559).

#### Align plugin and library output names

Plugins configured via `vast.plugins` in the configuration file can now be
specified using either the plugin name or the full path to the shared plugin
library. We no longer allow omitting the extension from specified plugin files,
and recommend using the plugin name as a more portable solution, e.g., `example`
over `libexample` and `/path/to/libexample.so` over `/path/to/libexample`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1527](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1527).

#### Prefix plugin library output names with vast-plugin-

To avoid confusion between the PCAP plugin and libpcap, which both have a
library file named `libpcap.so`, we now generally prefix the plugin library
output names with `vast-plugin-`. E.g., The PCAP plugin library file is now
named `libvast-plugin-pcap.so`. Plugins specified with a full path in the
configuration under `vast.plugins` must be adapted accordingly.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1593](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1593).

#### Make it possible to run VAST without user configs

The new option `--disable-default-config-dirs` disables the loading of user and
system configuration, schema, and plugin directories. We use this option
internally when running integration tests.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1557](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1557).

#### Update chat URL in README

The VAST community chat moved from Element to Gitter. Join us at
[gitter.im/tenzir/vast](https://gitter.im/tenzir/vast) or via Matrix at
`#tenzir_vast:gitter.im`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1591](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1591).

#### PRs 1514-1574

The `exporter.hits` metric has been removed.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1514](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1514).

#### PRs 1499-satta

VAST now ships with a schema record type for Suricata's `rfb` event type.

By [@satta](https://github.com/satta) in [#1499](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1499).

#### Remove deprecated format-specific options

The previously deprecated usage
([#1354](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/1354)) of format-independent
options after the format in commands is now no longer possible. This affects the
options `listen`, `read`, `schema`, `schema-file`, `type`, and `uds` for import
commands and the `write` and `uds` options for export commands.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1529](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1529).

#### Factor common functionality in component plugin

The status output of *Analyzer Plugins* moved from the `importer.analyzers` key
into the top-level record.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1544](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1544).

#### Move PCAP import/export into a plugin

Plugins must define a separate entrypoint in their build scaffolding using the
argument `ENTRYPOINT` to the CMake function `VASTRegisterPlugin`. If only a
single value is given to the argument `SOURCES`, it is interpreted as the
`ENTRYPOINT` automatically.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1549](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1549).

### Bug Fixes

#### Handle alias types properly for CSV

The CSV reader no longer crashes when encountering nested type aliases.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1534](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1534).

#### Move PCAP import/export into a plugin

Plugin unit tests now correctly load and initialize their respective plugins.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1549](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1549).

#### Fix start command detection for spdlog

Custom commands from plugins ending in `start` no longer try to write to the
server instead of the client log file.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1530](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1530).

#### Ignore spaces before SI prefixes

Spaces before SI prefixes in command line arguments and configuration options
are now generally ignored, e.g., it is now possible to set the disk monitor
budgets to `2 GiB` rather than `2GiB`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1590](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1590).

#### Multiple node shutdown fixes

The shutdown logic contained a bug that would make the node fail to terminate
in case a plugin actor is registered at said node.

A race condition in the shutdown logic that caused an assertion was fixed.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1563](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1563).

#### Fix exporter.selectivity for idle periods

The `exporter.selectivity` metric is now 1.0 instead of NaN for idle periods.

VAST no longer renders JSON numbers with non-finite numbers as `NaN`, `-NaN`,
`inf`, or `-inf`, resulting in invalid JSON output. Instead, such numbers are
now rendered as `null`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1574](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1574).

#### Deduplicate plugin entrypoint in sources

We fixed a regression that made it impossible to build static binaries from
outside of the repository root directory.

The `VASTRegisterPlugin` CMake function now correctly removes the `ENTRYPOINT`
from the given `SOURCES`, allowing for plugin developers to easily glob for
sources again.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1573](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1573).

#### Use proper full install dirs for system config

Specifying relative `CMAKE_INSTALL_*DIR` in the build configuration no longer
causes VAST not to pick up system-wide installed configuration files, schemas,
and plugins. The configured install prefix is now used correctly. The defunct
`VAST_SYSCONFDIR`, `VAST_DATADIR`, and `VAST_LIBDIR` CMake options no longer
exist. Use a combination of `CMAKE_INSTALL_PREFIX` and `CMAKE_INSTALL_*DIR`
instead.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1580](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1580).

#### Fix building VAST within a shallow git tree

VAST now correctly builds within shallow clones of the repository. If the build
system is unable to determine the correct version from `git-describe`, it now
always falls back to the version of the last release.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1570](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1570).

#### Avoid shutdown when config dirs are not readable

VAST no longer refuses to start when any of the configuration file directories
is unreadable, e.g., because VAST is running in a sandbox.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1533](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1533).

#### Ignore static plugins when specified in config

VAST no longer erroneously tries to load explicitly specified plugins
dynamically that are linked statically.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1528](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1528).

#### Fix the timezone shift to UTC for ISO8601 dates

A bug in the parsing of ISO8601 formatted dates that incorrectly adjusted the
time to the UTC timezone has been fixed.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1537](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1537).

#### Allow for building plugins separately from VAST

Linking against an installed VAST via CMake now correctly resolves VAST's
dependencies.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1532](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1532).

#### Fix out-of-bounds access in command-line parser

The command-line parser no longer crashes when encountering a flag with missing
value in the last position of a command invocation.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1536](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1536).
