---
title: VAST 2021.12.16
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2021.12.16
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2021.12.16).

### Features

#### PRs 1987-1992

Metrics events now optionally contain a metadata field that is a key-value
mapping of string to string, allowing for finer-grained introspection. For now
this enables correlation of metrics events and individual queries. A set of new
metrics for query lookup use this feature to include the query ID.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1987](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1987).

#### Make JSON field selectors configurable

JSON field selectors are now configurable instead of being hard-coded for
Suricata Eve JSON and Zeek Streaming JSON. E.g., `vast import json
--selector=event_type:suricata` is now equivalent to `vast import suricata`.
This allows for easier integration of JSONL data containing a field that
indicates its type.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1974](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1974).

#### Emit version column along with metrics

All metrics events now contain the version of VAST. Additionally, VAST now emits
startup and shutdown metrics at the start and stop of the VAST server.

By [@6yozo](https://github.com/6yozo) in [#1973](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1973).

### Changes

#### Type FlatBuffers

VAST's internal type system has a new on-disk data representation. While we
still support reading older databases, reverting to an older version of VAST
will not be possible after this change. Alongside this change, we've
implemented numerous fixes and streamlined handling of field name lookups,
which now more consistently handles the dot-separator. E.g., the query `#field
== "ip"` still matches the field `source.ip`, but no longer the field
`source_ip`. The change is also performance-relevant in the long-term: For data
persisted from previous versions of VAST we convert to the new type system on
the fly, and for newly ingested data we now have near zero-cost deserialization
for types, which should result in an overall speedup once the old data is
rotated out by the disk monitor.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1888](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1888).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix JSON default selector for nested records

The field-based default selector of the JSON import now correctly matches types
with nested record types.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1988](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1988).
