---
title: VAST 2021.01.28
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2021.01.28
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2021.01.28).

### Features

#### Add the import zeek-json command

The new `import zeek-json` command allows for importing line-delimited Zeek JSON
logs as produced by the
[json-streaming-logs](https://github.com/corelight/json-streaming-logs) package.
Unlike stock Zeek JSON logs, where one file contains exactly one log type, the
streaming format contains different log event types in a single stream and uses
an additional `_path` field to disambiguate the log type. For stock Zeek JSON
logs, use the existing `import json` with the `-t` flag to specify the log type.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1259](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1259).

#### Add per partition memory usage information to vast status

The output of `vast status` contains detailed memory usage information about
active and cached partitions.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1297](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1297).

#### PRs 1230-1246-1281-1314-1315-ngrodzitski

VAST relies on [simdjson](https://github.com/simdjson/simdjson) for JSON
parsing. The substantial gains in throughput shift the bottleneck of the ingest
path from parsing input to indexing at the node. To use the (yet experimental)
feature, use `vast import json|suricata|zeek-json --simdjson`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1230](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1230).

#### Make duration units abbreviations consistent

VAST queries also accept `nanoseconds`, `microseconds`, `milliseconds` `seconds`
and `minutes` as units for a duration.

By [@rolandpeelen](https://github.com/rolandpeelen) in [#1265](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1265).

#### Add third-party licenses for embedded dependencies

VAST installations bundle a LICENSE.3rdparty file alongside the regular LICENSE
file that lists all embedded code that is under a separate license.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1306](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1306).

#### PRs 1208-1264-1275-1282-1285-1287-1302-1307-1316

VAST features a new plugin framework to support efficient customization points
at various places of the data processing pipeline. There exist several base
classes that define an interface, e.g., for adding new commands or spawning a
new actor that processes the incoming stream of data. The directory
`examples/plugins/example` contains an example plugin.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1208](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1208).

### Changes

#### Consolidate Dockerfiles

The GitHub CI changed to Debian Buster and produces Debian artifacts instead of
Ubuntu artifacts. Similarly, the Docker images we provide on [Docker
Hub](https://hub.docker.com/r/tenzir/vast) use Debian Buster as base image. To
build Docker images locally, users must set `DOCKER_BUILDKIT=1` in the build
environment.

By [@0snap](https://github.com/0snap) in [#1294](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1294).

#### Rename `*-paths` to `*-dirs` options

The option `vast.schema-paths` is renamed to `vast.schema-dirs`. The old option
is deprecated and will be removed in a future release.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1287](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1287).

#### Support -v, -vv, -vvv, -q, -qq, -qqq for verbosity

The new short options `-v`, `-vv`, `-vvv`, `-q`, `-qq`, and `-qqq` map onto the
existing verbosity levels. The existing short syntax, e.g., `-v debug`, no
longer works.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1244](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1244).

#### PRs 1257-1289

VAST preserves nested JSON objects in events instead of formatting them in a
flattened form when exporting data with `vast export json`. The old behavior can
be enabled with `vast export json --flatten`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1257](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1257).

#### Make the start command print the endpoint on stdout

`vast start` prints the endpoint it is listening on when providing the option
`--print-endpoint`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1271](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1271).

### Bug Fixes

#### Handle Arrow decoder errors gracefully

Invalid Arrow table slices read from disk no longer trigger a segmentation
fault. Instead, the invalid on-disk state is ignored.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1247](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1247).

#### Check that disk budget was not specified as non-string

Disk monitor quota settings not ending in a 'B' are no longer silently
discarded.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1278](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1278).

#### Follow up for the CMake refactoring

For relocatable installations, the list of schema loading paths does not include
a build-time configured path any more.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1249](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1249).

#### Gracefully deal with JSON to data conversion errors

Values in JSON fields that can't be converted to the type that is specified in
the schema won't cause the containing event to be dropped any longer.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1250](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1250).

#### Remove check whether config file is a regular file

Manually specified configuration files may reside in the default location
directories. Configuration files can be symlinked.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1248](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1248).

#### Fix potential race condition between evaluator and partition

A potential race condition that could lead to a hanging export if a partition
was persisted just as it was scanned no longer exists.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1295](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1295).

#### Don't overwrite line content after a read timeout

Line based imports correctly handle read timeouts that occur in the middle of a
line.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1276](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1276).
