---
title: VAST 2021.02.24
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2021.02.24
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2021.02.24).

### Features

#### PRs 1330-1376

The meta index now stores partition synopses in separate files. This will
decrease restart times for systems with large databases, slow disks and
aggressive `readahead` settings. A new config setting `vast.meta-index-dir`
allows storing the meta index information in a separate directory.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1330](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1330).

#### Enable real-time metrics reporting

The new options `vast.metrics.file-sink.real-time` and
`vast.metrics.uds-sink.real-time` enable real-time metrics reporting for the
file sink and UDS sink respectively.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1368](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1368).

#### PRs 1343-1356-ngrodzitski

The JSON import now always relies upon [simdjson](https://simdjson.org). The
previously experimental `--simdjson` option to the `vast import
json|suricata|zeek-json` commands no longer exist as the feature is considered
stable.

By [@ngrodzitski](https://github.com/ngrodzitski) in [#1343](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1343).

#### PRs 1223-1362

VAST rotates server logs by default. The new config options
`vast.disable-log-rotation` and `vast.log-rotation-threshold` can be used to
control this behaviour.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1223](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1223).

#### Enable type extractors to support user defined types

The type extractor in the expression language now works with user defined types.
For example the type `port` is defined as `type port = count` in the base
schema. This type can now be queried with an expression like `:port == 80`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1382](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1382).

#### Add native Sigma support

[Sigma](https://github.com/Neo23x0/sigma) rules are now a valid format to
represent query expression. VAST parses the `detection` attribute of a rule and
translates it into a native query expression. To run a query using a Sigma rule,
pass it on standard input, e.g., `vast export json < rule.yaml`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1379](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1379).

### Changes

#### Render help and documentation on stdout

The output of `vast help` and `vast documentation` now goes to *stdout* instead
of to stderr. Erroneous invocations of `vast` also print the helptext, but in
this case the output still goes to stderr to avoid interference with downstream
tooling.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1385](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1385).

#### PRs 1343-1356-ngrodzitski

The `infer` command has an improved heuristic for the number types `int`,
`count`, and `real`.

By [@ngrodzitski](https://github.com/ngrodzitski) in [#1343](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1343).

#### Enable real-time metrics reporting

All options in `vast.metrics.*` had underscores in their names replaced with
dashes to align with other options. For example, `vast.metrics.file_sink` is now
`vast.metrics.file-sink`. The old options no longer work.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1368](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1368).

#### PRs 1223-1328-1334-1390-a4z

VAST switched to [spdlog >= 1.5.0](https://github.com/gabime/spdlog) for
logging. For users, this means: The `vast.console-format` and `vast.file-format`
now must be specified using the spdlog pattern syntax as described
[here](https://github.com/gabime/spdlog/wiki/3.-Custom-formatting#pattern-flags).
All settings under `caf.logger.*` are now ignored by VAST, and only the `vast.*`
counterparts are used for logger configuration.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1223](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1223).

#### Move options from format to the import subcommand

The options `listen`, `read`, `schema`, `schema-file`, `type`, and `uds` can
from now on be supplied to the `import` command directly. Similarly, the options
`write` and `uds` can be supplied to the `export` command. All options can still
be used after the format subcommand, but that usage is deprecated.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1354](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1354).

#### Expand subnet value predicates

The query normalizer interprets value predicates of type `subnet` more broadly:
given a subnet `S`, the parser expands this to the expression `:subnet == S ||
:addr in S`. This change makes it easier to search for IP addresses belonging to
a specific subnet.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1373](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1373).

#### Read user-supplied schema files from config dirs

User-supplied schema files are now picked up from `<SYSCONFDIR>/vast/schema` and
`<XDG_CONFIG_HOME>/vast/schema` instead of `<XDG_DATA_HOME>/vast/schema`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1372](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1372).

#### Remove long-deprecated code

The previously deprecated options `vast.spawn.importer.ids` and
`vast.schema-paths` no longer work. Furthermore, queries spread over multiple
arguments are now disallowed instead of triggering a deprecation warning.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1374](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1374).

#### Require fmt to be installed separately from spdlog

VAST now requires [fmt >= 5.2.1](https://fmt.dev) to be installed.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1330](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1330).

#### Introduce and make use of the timestamp type

The special meaning of the `#timestamp` attribute has been removed from the
schema language. Timestamps can from now on be marked as such by using the
`timestamp` type instead. Queries of the form `#timestamp <op> value` remain
operational but are deprecated in favor of `:timestamp`. Note that this change
also affects `:time` queries, which aren't supersets of `#timestamp` queries any
longer.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1388](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1388).

#### Make it easier to reference user defined types in the schema language

Schema parsing now uses a 2-pass loading phase so that type aliases can
reference other types that are later defined in the same directory.
Additionally, type definitions from already parsed schema dirs can be referenced
from schema types that are parsed later. Types can also be redefined in later
directories, but a type can not be defined twice in the same directory.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1331](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1331).

### Bug Fixes

#### Revert "Fix potential race condition between evaluator and partition"

An ordering issue introduced in
[#1295](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/1295) that could lead to a segfault
with long-running queries was reverted.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1381](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1381).

#### Let the JSON reader recover from unexpected inputs

A bug in the new simdjson based JSON reader introduced in
[#1356](https://github.com/tenzir/vast/pull/1356) could trigger an assertion in
the `vast import` process if an input field could not be converted to the field
type in the target layout. This is no longer the case.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1386](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1386).
