---
title: VAST 2021.09.30
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: 2021.09.30
    variant: note
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/2021.09.30).

### Features

#### Let empty queries export everything

The query argument to the export and count commands may now be omitted, which
causes the commands to operate on all data. Note that this may be a very
expensive operation, so use with caution.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1879](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1879).

#### Add Zeek writer plugin

The `broker` plugin is now a also *writer* plugin on top of being already a
*reader* plugin. The new plugin enables exporting query results directly into a
a Zeek process, e.g., to write Zeek scripts that incorporate context from the
past. Run `vast export broker <expr>` to ship events via Broker that Zeek
dispatches under the event `VAST::data(layout: string, data: any)`.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#1863](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1863).

#### Add the streaming and query info to the index status

The output of `vast status --detailed` now contains information about queries
  that are currently processed in the index.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1881](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1881).

#### Add tool to regenerate .mdx files

The new tool `mdx-regenerate` allows operators to re-create all `.mdx` files in
a database directory to the latest file format version while VAST is running.
This is useful for advanced users in preparation for version upgrades that bump
the format version.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1866](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1866).

#### Bundle an example configuration file with plugins

If present in the plugin source directory, the build scaffolding now
automatically installs `<plugin>.yaml.example` files, commenting out every line
so the file has no effect. This serves as documentation for operators that can
modify the installed file in-place.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1860](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1860).

#### Show loaded config files in status output

Running `vat status --detailed` now lists all loaded configuration files under
`system.config-files`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1871](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1871).

### Changes

#### Make partition-local stores the default

The default store backend now is `segment-store` in order to enable the use of
partition transforms in the future. To continue using the (now deprecated)
legacy store backend, set `vast.store-backend` to archive.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#1876](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1876).

#### Install example configuration files to datarootdir

Example configuration files are now installed to the datarootdir as opposed to
the sysconfdir in order to avoid overriding previously installed configuration
files.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1880](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1880).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix possible garbage in status command output

The status command no longer occasionally contains garbage keys when the VAST
server is under high load.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1872](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1872).

#### Fix response promises for disk monitor deletion

The disk monitor no longer fails to delete segments of particularly busy
partitions with the `segment-store` store backend.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1892](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1892).

#### Tailor expressions in filter operation

Import filter expressions now work correctly with queries using field
extractors, e.g., `vast import suricata 'event_type == "alert"' <
path/to/eve.json`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1885](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1885).

#### Disallow unsupported field meta extractor predicates

Expression predicates of the `#field` type now produce error messages instead of
empty result sets for operations that are not supported.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#1886](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1886).

#### Fix possible desync in pending queries map

The index now correctly cancels pending queries when the requester dies.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1884](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1884).

#### Fix ignoring of remote sources and sinks for status

Remote sources and sinks are no longer erroneously included in the output of
VAST status.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#1873](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/1873).
