---
title: VAST v2.2.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v2.2.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v2.2.0).

### Features

#### Summarize operator with pluggable aggregation functions

The `summarize` operator supports three new aggregation functions: `sample`
takes the first value in every group, `distinct` filters out duplicate values,
and `count` yields the number of values.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2417](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2417).

#### Implement a `flush` command

The new `flush` command causes VAST to decommission all currently active
partitions, i.e., write all active partitions to disk immediately regardless of
their size or the active partition timeout. This is particularly useful for
testing, or when needing to guarantee in automated scripts that input is
available for operations that only work on persisted passive partitions. The
`flush` command returns only after all active partitions were flushed to disk.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2396](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2396).

#### Introduce `select` / `replace` / `extend` operators

The new `extend` pipeline operator allows for adding new fields with fixed
values to data.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2423](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2423).

#### Run commands from scripts

The cloud execution commands (`run-lambda` and `execute-command`) now accept
scripts from file-like handles. To improve the usability of this feature, the
whole host file system is now mounted into the CLI container.

By [@rdettai](https://github.com/rdettai) in [#2446](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2446).

#### Support dropping entire schemas in `drop` operator

The `drop` pipeline operator now drops entire schemas spcefied by name in the
`schemas` configuration key in addition to dropping fields by extractors in the
`fields` configuration key.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2419](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2419).

### Changes

#### Add clean command

An `init` command was added to `vast-cloud` to help getting out of inconsistent
Terraform states.

By [@rdettai](https://github.com/rdettai) in [#2435](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2435).

#### Implement Apache Parquet & Apache Feather V2 stores

Metrics for VAST's store lookups now use the keys
`{active,passive}-store.lookup.{runtime,hits}`. The store type metadata field
now distinguishes between the various supported store types, e.g., `parquet`,
`feather`, or `segment-store`, rather than containing `active` or `passive`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2413](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2413).

#### Rename transform to pipeline

Transforms are now called pipelines. In your configuration, replace `transform`
with `pipeline` in all keys.

By [@dispanser](https://github.com/dispanser) in [#2429](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2429).

#### Introduce `select` / `replace` / `extend` operators

The `put` pipeline operator is now called `select`, as we've abandoned plans to
integrate the functionality of `replace` into it.

The `replace` pipeline operator now supports multiple replacements in one
configuration, which aligns the behavior with other operators.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2423](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2423).

#### Summarize operator with pluggable aggregation functions

The `summarize` pipeline operator is now a builtin; the previously bundled
`summarize` plugin no longer exists. Aggregation functions in the `summarize`
operator are now plugins, which makes them easily extensible. The syntax of
`summarize` now supports specification of output field names, similar to SQL's
`AS` in `SELECT f(x) AS name`.

The undocumented `count` pipeline operator no longer exists.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2417](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2417).

### Bug Fixes

#### Make partition deletion resilient against oversize

VAST is now able to detect corrupt index files and will attempt to repair them
on startup.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2431](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2431).

#### Make transform application transactional

We fixed a race condition when VAST crashed while applying a partition
transform, leading to data duplication.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#2465](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2465).

#### Properly indicate failure in the rebuild command

The rebuild command no longer crashes on failure, and displays the encountered
error instead.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2466](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2466).

#### Fix missing options sometimes not causing an error

Missing arguments for the `--plugins`, `--plugin-dirs`, and `--schema-dirs`
command line options no longer cause VAST to crash occasionally.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2470](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2470).

#### Fix `vast.export.json.omit-nulls` for nested records

The JSON export with `--omit-nulls` now correctly handles nested records whose
first field is `null` instead of dropping them entirely.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2447](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2447).

#### Render reals with at least one decimal place

VAST will export `real` values in JSON consistently with at least one decimal
place.

By [@patszt](https://github.com/patszt) in [#2393](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2393).
