---
title: VAST v2.4.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v2.4.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v2.4.0).

### Features

#### Cloud MISP

VAST Cloud has now a MISP plugin that enables to add a MISP instance to the
cloud stack.

By [@rdettai](https://github.com/rdettai) in [#2548](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2548).

#### Make data predicate evaluation column-major

Queries without acceleration from a dense index run significantly faster, e.g.,
initial tests show a 2x performance improvement for substring queries.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2730](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2730).

#### PRs 2567-2614-2638-3681

The new experimental web plugin offers a RESTful API to VAST and a bundled web
user interface in Svelte.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#2567](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2567).

#### Rebatch undersized batches when rebuilding partitions

Rebuilding partitions now additionally rebatches the contained events to
`vast.import.batch-size` events per batch, which accelerates queries against
partitions that previously had undersized batches.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2583](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2583).

#### PRs 2513-2738

We now distribute VAST also as Debian Package with every new release. The Debian
package automatically installs a systemd service and creates a `vast` user for
the VAST process.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2513](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2513).

#### Add "-total" metric keys for schema-dependent metrics

VAST has three new metrics: `catalog.num-partitions-total`,
`catalog.num-events-total`, and `ingest-total` that sum up all schema-based
metrics by their respective schema-based metric counterparts.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#2682](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2682).

#### Disable building unit tests in Dockerfile

VAST Cloud can now expose HTTP services using Cloudflare Access.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2578](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2578).

#### Emit metrics from the filesystem actor

VAST now emits metrics for filesystem access under the keys
`posix-filesystem.{checks,writes,reads,mmaps,erases,moves}.{successful,failed,bytes}`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2572](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2572).

#### Enable configuration of the zstd compression level for feather store

VAST has a new configuration setting, `vast.zstd-compression-level`, to control
the compression level of the Zstd algorithm used in both the Feather and
Parquet store backends. The default level is set by the Apache Arrow library,
and for Parquet is no longer explicitly defaulted to `9`.

By [@dispanser](https://github.com/dispanser) in [#2623](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2623).

#### PRs 2574-2652

VAST now ships a Docker Compose file. In particular, the Docker Compose stack
now has a TheHive integration that can run VAST queries as a Cortex Analyzer.

By [@KaanSK](https://github.com/KaanSK) in [#2574](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2574).

### Changes

#### Move the version string into a central JSON file

Building VAST from source now requires CMake 3.19 or greater.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2582](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2582).

#### Make `feather` the default store-backend

The default store backend of VAST is now `feather`. Reading from VAST's custom
`segment-store` backend is still transparently supported, but new partitions
automatically write to the Apache Feather V2 backend instead.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2587](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2587).

#### Change default endpoint to 127.0.0.1

We changed the default VAST endpoint from `localhost` to `127.0.0.1`. This
ensures the listening address is deterministic and not dependent on the
host-specific IPv4 and IPv6 resolution. For example, resolving `localhost`
yields a list of addresses, and if VAST fails to bind on the first (e.g., to due
to a lingering socket) it would silently go to the next. Taking name resolution
out of the equation fixes such issues. Set the option `vast.endpoint` to
override the default endpoint.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#2512](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2512).

#### Load "all" plugins by default & allow "empty" values

VAST now loads all plugins by default. To revert to the old behavior,
explicitly set the `vast.plugins` option to have no value.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#2689](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2689).

#### Add memory-usage to index and catalog telemetry reports

VAST now emits per-component memory usage metrics under the keys
`index.memory-usage` and `catalog.memory-usage`.

By [@patszt](https://github.com/patszt) in [#2471](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2471).

#### Remove PyVAST in favor of new Python bindings

We removed PyVAST from the code base in favor of the new Python bindings. PyVAST
continues to work as a thin wrapper around the VAST binary, but will no longer
be released alongside VAST.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2674](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2674).

#### Rename `vast dump` to `vast show`

The `vast dump` command is now called `vast show`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2686](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2686).

#### Arrow 10.0.0 support

Building VAST from source now requires [Apache Arrow
10.0](https://arrow.apache.org/blog/2022/10/31/10.0.0-release/) or newer.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#2685](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2685).

### Bug Fixes

#### Add a timeout to the UDS metric sink

The UDS metrics sink no longer deadlocks due to suspended listeners.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2635](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2635).

#### Remove caf::skip usages

Rebuilding of heterogeneous partition no longer freezes the entire rebuilder on
pipeline failures.

By [@patszt](https://github.com/patszt) in [#2530](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2530).

#### Fix a connection error message

The error message on connection failure now contains a correctly formatted
target endpoint.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2609](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2609).

#### Remove the shutdown grace period

VAST no longer attempts to hard-kill itself if the shutdown did not finish
within the configured grace period. The option `vast.shutdown-grace-period` no
longer exists. We recommend setting `TimeoutStopSec=180` in the VAST systemd
service definition to restore the previous behavior.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#2568](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2568).

#### Don't abort startup if individual partitions fail to load

VAST now skips unreadable partitions while starting up, instead of aborting the
initialization routine.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2515](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2515).

#### Allow read access to user home dir in the systemd unit

The systemd service no longer fails if the home directory of the vast user is
not in `/var/lib/vast`.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#2734](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2734).

#### Clear failed partitions from the cache

VAST now ejects partitions from the LRU cache if they fail to load with an I/O error.

By [@lava](https://github.com/lava) in [#2642](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/2642).
