---
title: VAST v3.1.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v3.1.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v3.1.0).

### Features

#### Introduce a `version` source operator

The `vast exec` command now supports implicit sinks for pipelines that end in
events or bytes: `write json --pretty` and `save file -`, respectively.

The `--pretty` option for the JSON printer enables multi-line output.

The new `version` source operator yields a single event containing VAST's
version and a list of enabled plugins.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3123](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3123).

#### Implement the `measure` operator

The `inspect` operator replaces the events or bytes it receives with incremental
metrics describing the input.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3093](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3093).

#### PRs 3036-3039-3089

The `put` operator is the new companion to the existing `extend` and `replace`
operators. It specifies the output fields exactly, referring either to input
fields with an extractor, metadata with a selector, or a fixed value.

The `extend` and `replace` operators now support assigning extractors and
selectors in addition to just fixed values.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3036](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3036).

#### Add `directory` saver

The new `directory` sink creates a directory with a file for each schema in
the specified format.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#3098](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3098).

#### Introduce the `count_distinct` aggregation function

The `count_distinct` aggregation function returns the number of distinct,
non-null values.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3068](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3068).

#### Expose the lower-level `load`, `parse`, `print`, and `save` operators

The new `from <connector> [read <format>]`, `read <format> [from <connector>]`,
`write <format> [to <connector>]`, and `to <connector> [write <format>]`
operators bring together a connector and a format to prduce and consume events,
respectively. Their lower-level building blocks `load <connector>`, `parse
<format>`, `print <format>`, and `save <connector>` enable expert users to
operate on raw byte streams directly.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3079](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3079).

#### Add `unique` operator

The newly-added `unique` operator removes adjacent duplicates.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3051](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3051).

#### Add Feather and Parquet parsers and printers

The `feather` and `parquet` formats allow for reading and writing events from
and to the Apache Feather V2 and Apache Parquet files, respectively.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3103](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3103).

#### Implement `xsv` parser & printer

The `xsv` format enables the user to parse and print character-separated
values, with the additional `csv`, `tsv` and `ssv` formats as sane defaults.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#3104](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3104).

#### Implement a distributed pipeline executor

Pipelines may now span across multiple processes. This will enable upcoming
operators that do not just run locally in the `vast exec` process, but rather
connect to a VAST node and partially run in that node. The new operator
modifiers `remote` and `local` allow expert users to control where parts of
their pipeline run explicitly, e.g., to offload compute to a more powerful node.
Potentially unsafe use of these modifiers requires setting
`vast.allow-unsafe-pipelines` to `true` in the configuration file.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3119](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3119).

#### Add new CEF parser plugin

The `cef` parser allows for using the CEF format with the new pipelines.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3110](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3110).

#### Upgrade exporter to use new pipelines

The `vast export` command now accepts the new pipelines as input. Furthermore,
`vast export <expr>` is now deprecated in favor of `vast export 'where <expr>'`.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3076](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3076).

#### Implement a `zeek-tsv` format

The `zeek-tsv` format parses and prints Zeek's native tab-separated value (TSV)
representation of logs.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#3114](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3114).

#### Upgrade partition transformer to new pipelines

User-defined operator aliases make pipelines easier to use by enabling users to
encapsulate a pipelinea into a new operator. To define a user-defined operator
alias, add an entry to the `vast.operators` section of your configuration.

Compaction now makes use of the new pipeline operators, and allows pipelines to
be defined inline instead in addition to the now deprecated `vast.pipelines`
configuration section.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3064](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3064).

#### Add `tail` operator

The new `tail` pipeline operator limits all latest events to a specified
number. The operator takes the limit as an optional argument, with the default
value being 10.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#3050](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3050).

#### PRs 3085-3088-3097

The new `file` connector enables the user to process file input/output as data
in a pipeline. This includes regular files, UDS files as well as
`stdin/stdout`.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3085](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3085).

### Changes

#### Restart the systemd service on failure

The bundled systemd service is now configured to restart VAST in case of a
failure.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#3058](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3058).

#### Add support for user-defined operator aliases

The `vast.operators` section in the configuration file supersedes the now
deprecated `vast.pipelines` section and more generally enables user-defined
operators. Defined operators now must use the new, textual format introduced
with VAST v3.0, and are available for use in all places where pipelines
are supported.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3067](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3067).

#### Upgrade exporter to use new pipelines

The `exporter.*` metrics no longer exist, and will return in a future release as
a more generic instrumentation mechanism for all pipelines.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3076](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3076).

#### Update query endpoint to use new pipeline executor

The `/query` REST endpoint no longer accepts an expression at the start of the
query. Instead, use `where <expr> | ...`.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#3015](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3015).

#### Remove configuration-defined import/export pipelines

As already announced with the VAST v3.0 release, the `vast.pipeline-triggers`
option now no longer functions. The feature will be replaced with node
ingress/egress pipelines that fit better into a multi-node model than the
previous feature that was built under the assumption of a client/server model
with a single server.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3052](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3052).

### Bug Fixes

#### Introduce the `count_distinct` aggregation function

The `distinct` function silently performed a different operation on lists,
returning the distinct non-null elements in the list rather than operating on
the list itself. This special-casing no longer exists, and instead the function
now operates on the lists itself. This feature will return in the future as
unnesting on the extractor level via `distinct(field[])`, but for now it has to
go to make the `distinct` aggregation function work consistently.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3068](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3068).

#### Mark some CAF types as nodiscard

Tokens created with `vast web generate-token` now persist correctly, and work
across restarts of VAST.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3086](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3086).

#### Fix subnet queries for some subnets

VAST incorrectly handled subnets using IPv6 addresses for which an equivalent
IPv4 address existed. This is now done correctly. For example, the query `where
:ip !in ::ffff:0:0/96` now returns all events containing an IP address that
cannot be represented as an IPv4 address. As an additional safeguard, the VAST
language no longer allows for constructing subnets for IPv4 addresses with
lengths greater than 32.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3060](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3060).

#### Set minimum timestamp of partitions properly

Some pipelines in compaction caused transformed partitions to be treated as if
they were older than they were supposed to be, causing them to be picked up
again for deletion too early. This bug no longer exists, and compacted
partitions are now considered at most as old as the oldest event before
compaction.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3141](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3141).

#### Align endpoints between regular and slim Docker images

The `tenzir/vast` image now listens on `0.0.0.0:5158` instead of
`127.0.0.1:5158` by default, which aligns the behavior with the
`tenzir/vast-slim` image.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3137](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3137).

#### Fix remaining partitions counter in the rebuilder

The `rebuilder.partitions.remaining` metric sometimes reported wrong values when
partitions for at least one schema did not need to be rebuilt. We aligned the
metrics with the actual functionality.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#3147](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3147).

#### Bump vast-plugins to a95e420

The matcher plugin no longer causes deadlocks through detached matcher clients.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#3115](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3115).
