---
title: Tenzir Node v4.17.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v4.17.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v4.17.0).

### Features

#### Fix a potential crash in `enrich --replace`

The `enrich` operator no longer crashes when it is used to replace a field value with a context value of a different type and the context is not able to provide a substitute for all inputs.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#4291](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4291).

#### Implement the `azure-log-analytics` plugin

The new `azure-log-analytics` operator makes it possible to upload events to
supported or custom tables in Microsoft Azure.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#4281](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4281).

#### Make the parallel level in `lookup` configurable

The `lookup` operator gained a new `--parallel <level>` option controlling the
number of partitions the operator is allowed to open at once for retrospective
lookups. This can significantly increase performance at the cost of higher
resource usage. The option defaults to 3. To restore the previous behavior, set
the option to 1.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4300](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4300).

#### Add the `ttl` to the `/pipeline/list` API

The `/pipeline/list` API now includes a new `ttl` field showing the TTL of the
pipeline. The remaining TTL moved from `ttl_expires_in_ns` to a `remaining_ttl`
field, aligning the output of the API with the `show pipelines` operator.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4314](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4314).

#### Allow pip to write to stdout in venv creation

We fixed bug that caused python-pip to fail when creating the runtime
environment for the python operator.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#4279](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4279).

#### Add a `rendered` field to diagnostics

Newly created diagnostics returned from the `diagnostics` now contain a
`rendered` field that contains a rendered form of the diagnostic. To restore the
previous behavior, use `diagnostics | drop rendered`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4290](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4290).

#### Fix healthcheck in docker-compose.yaml

`context update <name>` for `lookup-table` contexts now supports per-entry
timeouts. The `--create-timeout <duration>` option sets the time after which
lookup table entries expire, and the `--update-timeout <duration>` option sets
the time after which lookup table entries expire if they are not accessed.

By [@lo-chr](https://github.com/lo-chr) in [#5126](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5126).

#### Print Operator

The `print` operator allows for printing record fields as strings with any
format.

By [@balavinaithirthan](https://github.com/balavinaithirthan) in [#4265](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4265).

### Changes

#### Remove built-in type aliases

The built-in type aliases `timestamp` and `port` for `time` and `uint64`,
respectively, no longer exist. They were an artifact of Tenzir from before it
supported schema inference in most parsers, and did not play well with many
operators when used together with inferred types from other parsers.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4299](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4299).

#### Include hidden pipelines in `show pipelines`

`show pipelines` now includes "hidden" pipelines run by the by the Tenzir
Platform or through the API. These pipelines usually run background jobs, so
they're intentionally hidden from the `/pipeline/list` API.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4309](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4309).

### Bug Fixes

#### Make `ip == subnet` and `string == pattern` commutative

`subnet == ip` and `pattern == string` predicates now behave just like `ip ==
subnet` and `string == pattern` predicates.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4280](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4280).

#### Fix start abort error message

Errors during pipeline startup are properly propagated instead of being replaced
by `error: failed to run` in some situations.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#4288](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4288).

#### Add missing `-X` option for `kafka` saver

The `-X` option for overriding configuration options for `librdkafka` now works
the `kafka` saver as well. Previously, the option was only exposed for the
loader, unlike advertised in the documentation.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4317](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4317).

#### Tone down execution node backoff behavior

We fixed a regression that caused excess CPU usage for some operators when idle.
This was most visible with the `subscribe`, `export`, `metrics`, `diagnostics`,
`lookup` and `enrich` operators.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4297](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4297).

#### Implement the `azure-log-analytics` plugin

The `https` and related savers now signal an error when the saver-related
upload fails.

By [@Dakostu](https://github.com/Dakostu) in [#4281](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4281).

#### Fix using `summarize â€¦ by x` when `x` is of type `null`

The `summarize` operator no longer crashes when grpuping by a field of type
`null`, i.e., a field whose type could not be inferred because all of its values
were `null`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4289](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4289).
