---
title: Tenzir Node v4.11.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v4.11.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v4.11.0).

### Features

#### Add a `files` source

The new `files` source lists file information for a given directory.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4035](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4035).

#### Add the `set` operator for upserting fields

The new `set` operator upserts fields, i.e., acts like `replace` for existing
fields and like `extend` for new fields. It also supports setting the schema
name explicitly via `set #schema="new-name"`.

The `put` operator now supports setting the schema name explicitly via `put
#schema="new-name"`.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4057](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4057).

#### Introduce `--replace`, `--separate`, and `--yield` for contexts

The `--replace` option for the `enrich` operator causes the input values to be
replaced with their context instead of extending the event with the context,
resulting in a leaner output.

The `--separate` option makes the `enrich` and `lookup` operators handle each
field individually, duplicating the event for each relevant field, and
returning at most one context per output event.

The `--yield <field>` option allows for adding only a part of a context with the
`enrich` and `lookup` operators. For example, with a `geoip` context with a
MaxMind country database, `--yield registered_country.iso_code` will cause the
enrichment to only consist of the country's ISO code.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4040](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4040).

#### Introduce the `every` operator modifier

The `every <interval>` operator modifier executes a source operator repeatedly.
For example, `every 1h from http://foo.com/bar` polls an endpoint every hour.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4050](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4050).

#### Add SQS Connector

The new `sqs` connector makes it possible to read from and write to Amazon SQS
queues.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#3819](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3819).

#### Add an email saver

The new `email` saver allows for sending pipeline data via email by connecting
to a mail server via SMTP or SMTPS.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#4041](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4041).

### Changes

#### Introduce `--replace`, `--separate`, and `--yield` for contexts

The `enrich` and `lookup` operators now include the metadata in every context
object to accomodate the new `--replace` and `--separate` options. Previously,
the metadata was available once in the output field.

The `mode` field in the enrichments returned from the `lookup` operator is now
`lookup.retro`, `lookup.live`, or `lookup.snapshot` depending on the mode.

The `bloom-filter` context now always returns `true` or `null` for the context
instead of embedding the result in a record with a single `data` field.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4040](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4040).

### Bug Fixes

#### Introduce `--replace`, `--separate`, and `--yield` for contexts

`drop` and `select` silently ignored all but the first match of the specified
type extractors and concepts. This no longer happens. For example, `drop :time`
drops all fields with type `time` from events.

Enriching a field in adjacent events in `lookup` and `enrich` with a
`lookup-table` context sometimes crashed when the lookup-table referred to
values of different types.

The `geoip` context sometimes returned incorrect values. This no longer happens.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4040](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4040).

#### Add SQS Connector

Source operators that do not quit on their own only freed their resources after
they had emitted an additional output, even after the pipeline had already
exited. This sometimes caused errors when restarting pipelines, and in rare
cases caused Tenzir nodes to hang on shutdown. This no longer happens, and the
entire pipeline shuts down at once.

By [@mavam](https://github.com/mavam) in [#3819](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/3819).

#### Fix disk metrics with custom state directories

Disk metrics now work correctly for deployments with a customized state
directory.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4058](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4058).

#### Fix `from <url>` with username

`from <url>` now also works when the url specifies username and password.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#4043](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4043).

#### Fix an off-by-one error when loading persisted contexts

We fixed a bug that caused every second context to become unavailable after a
restarting the node.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4045](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4045).

#### Fix invalid assertion in `compress` operator

The `compress` and `to` operators no longer fail when compression is unable to
further reduce the size of a batch of bytes.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#4048](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4048).
