---
title: Tenzir Node v4.29.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v4.29.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v4.29.0).

### Features

#### Implement sub-duration functions

New functions `years`, `months`, `weeks`, `days`, `hours`, `minutes`, `seconds`,
`milliseconds`, `microseconds` and `nanoseconds` convert a numeric value to the
equivalent duration. Their counterpart `count_*` functions calculate how many
units can the duration be broken into, i.e. `duration / unit`.

The `abs` function calculates the absolute value for a number or a duration.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#4985](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/4985).

#### Implement `base` option for `int()` and `uint()`

The new `base` option for `int` and `uint` functions allows parsing hexadecimal
numbers in strings.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5006](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5006).

#### Implement some `print_*` functions

The `write_xsv` family of operators now accepts multi-character separators,
instead of being restricted to a single character.

We added the `write_kv` operator, allowing you to write events as Key-Value
pairs.

We added the functions `any.print_json()` and `any.print_yaml()` to print any
value as a JSON or YAML string.

We added the functions `record.print_kv()`, `record.print_csv()`,
`record.print_ssv()`, `record.print_tsv()` and `record.print_xsv()` to print
records as the respective format.

By [@IyeOnline](https://github.com/IyeOnline) in [#5001](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5001).

### Changes

#### Compact NDJSON output

The output of `write_ndjson` is now more compact and no longer includes
unnecessary whitespace. Additionally, `write_json` no longer prints a trailing
whitespace after each comma.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5015](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5015).

#### Allow values to be `null` when charting

The `chart_area`, `chart_bar`, and `chart_pie` operators no longer reject
null-values. Previously, gaps in charts were only supported for `chart_line`.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5009](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5009).

#### Implement some `print_*` functions

The `sep` argument on the `flatten` and `unflatten` functions is now a
positional argument, allowing you to simply write `record.flatten("-")`.

The `unflatten` option found on many `read_*` operators and `parse_*` functions
is now called `unflatten_separator`.

The `field_sep`, `list_sep` and `null_value` options on the XSV operators and
functions (such as `read_xsv`, `write_csv` or `parse_tsv`) are now named
arguments on all of them and are called `field_separator`, `list_separator`
and `null_value`.

The `field_split` and `list_split` arguments for the `read_kv` operator and
`parse_kv` function are now named arguments.

By [@IyeOnline](https://github.com/IyeOnline) in [#5001](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5001).

### Bug Fixes

#### Add to_splunk to the ce binary packages

We now include the `to_splunk` operator in the Tenzir binary packages.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#5012](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5012).

#### Normalize pushed-up predicates in `subscribe`

We fixed an optimization bug that caused pipelines of the form `subscribe
<topic> | where <value> in <field>` to evaluate the predicate `<field> in
<value>` instead, returning incorrect results from the pipeline.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5014](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5014).

#### Respect `--color` option in default implicit events sink

The implicit events sink of the `tenzir` binary now respects the
`--color=[always|never|auto]` option and the `NO_COLOR` environment variable.
Previously, color usage was only determined based on whether `stdout` had a TTY
attached.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5007](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5007).

#### Fix a crash in `{parse,read}_grok` for invalid patterns

The `read_grok` operator and `parse_grok` functions no longer crash when
providing an invalid Grok expression.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5018](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5018).

#### Fix compilation error handling inside `if`

A compilation error within an `if` statement no longer causes pipelines to
crash.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#5011](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5011).

#### Remove type layering

We fixed a bug that caused `type_id(this)` to return inconsistent values for
schemas with metadata attached, e.g., after assigning a schema name via `@name =
"new_name"` or using operators like `chart_line` that add custom metadata to a
schema for use of the Tenzir Platform. Unfortunately, this may cause charts or
tables added to dashboards before Tenzir Platform v1.7 to break. To fix them,
click on the action menu on the chart or table on the dashboard, click "Open in
Explorer," and re-add the chart or table to the dashboard. We are sorry about
this inconvenience.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5008](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5008).
