---
title: Tenzir Node v4.30.0
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v4.30.0
    variant: success
---

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v4.30.0).

### Features

#### Add a global ca-certificates config option

We introduced common TLS settings for all operators that support TLS. The Tenzir
config now has a key `cacert`, which will set the CA certificate file for all
operators using it. The default for this will be chosen appropriately for the
system.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#5022](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5022).

#### Add `to_clickhouse` operator

We have added a new `to_clickhouse` operator, which enables you to easily send
events to ClickHouse.

By [@IyeOnline](https://github.com/IyeOnline) in [#5032](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5032).

#### Port `load_gcs` and `save_gcs` to TQL2

The `load_gcs` and `save_gcs` operators are now available in TQL2 to interact
with Google Cloud Storage.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5054](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5054).

#### Implement an `assert_throughput` operator

The new `assert_throughput` operators allows for checking whether a pipeline
meets the minimum expected throughput at any place in the pipeline.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5055](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5055).

#### Introduce `metrics "pipeline"`

`metrics "pipeline"` provides an easy way to view the ingress and egress of
pipelines. The new metrics show the ingress and egress of every pipeline in
windows of ten seconds.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5024](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5024).

### Changes

#### Add a global ca-certificates config option

The `skip_host_verification` option has been removed from the `load_http`,
`save_email` and `save_http` operators. Its functionality has been merged into
the `skip_peer_verification` option.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#5022](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5022).

#### Introduce `metrics "pipeline"`

`metrics "operator"` is now deprecated. Use `metrics "pipeline"` instead, which
offers a pre-aggregated view of pipeline metrics. We plan to remove operator
metrics in an upcoming release, as they are too expensive in large-scale
deployments.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5024](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5024).

### Bug Fixes

#### Fix passing string params to `{from,to}_fluent_bit`

We fixed a regression that caused strings passed as options to the
`from_fluent_bit` and `to_fluent_bit` operators to incorrectly be surrounded by
double quotes.

`to_fluent_bit` incorrectly reported zero bytes being pushed to the Fluent Bit
engine as an error. This no longer happens.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5053](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5053).

#### Fix bug that caused `read_zeek_tsv` to produce invalid fields

The `read_zeek_tsv` operator sometimes produced an invalid field with the name
`\0` for types without a schema specified. This no longer happens.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5052](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5052).

#### Fix crash in `from "path/to/file.ndjson"`

The `from` operator no longer incorrectly attempts to use parsers with a known
file extension that is a suffix of the actual file extension. For example, `from
"file.foojson"` will no longer attempt to use the `json` parser by default,
while `from "file.foo.json"` and `from "file.json"` continue to work as
expected. This fixes an error for `.ndjson` files, which could previously not
decide between the `json` and `ndjson` parsers.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5050](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5050).
