---
title: TQL2, Always
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v5.0.0
    variant: tip
---

Tenzir Node v5.0 makes TQL2 the default and only option throughout Tenzir.

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v5.0.0).

### Features

#### Implement `from_http`

`from_http <host:port>, server=true` creates an HTTP/1.1 server that listens on
a specified hostname and port. In the future, the `load_http` operator's HTTP
client will be integrated with this operator as well, eventually superseding
`load_http`.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5114](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5114).

#### Add optimizations for `if`

The `mo` suffix allows for specifying durations in terms of months. For example,
`3mo` returns a duration equivalent to three months. The unit has alternative
spellings `month` and `months`, and is defined as one twelfth of a year.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5110](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5110).

#### Fix panic in `head 0 | write_json arrays_of_objects=true`

`write_json arrays_of_objects=true` now works correctly with an empty input,
returning an empty JSON array instead of running into a panic.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5115](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5115).

#### Implement `move` operator

We added a new `move` operator that moves a field into another, effectively a
smart renaming such as `ctx.message=status.msg` moves the values from
`status.msg` into the field `message` of a record `ctx` and drops `status.msg`.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5117](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5117).

#### Add a `hidden` field to `diagnostics`

The output of the `diagnostics` operator now includes an additional `hidden`
field that is set to `true` for pipelines that are not visible on the Pipelines
page of the Tenzir Platform, e.g., because they're run under-the-hood by the
platform or interactively in the Explorer.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5119](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5119).

### Changes

#### Make TQL2 the default

TQL2 is now the default and only option for writing pipelines with Tenzir. The
environment variable `TENZIR_TQL2`, the configuration option `tenzir.tql2` have
no more effect. Using the command-line option `--tql2` results in an error.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5086](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5086).

#### Implement `file_content(path:string)`

We added a new function `file_contents` to read bytes from a file with an
absolute path.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5111](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5111).

#### Add optimizations for `if`

`1y` in TQL now equals 365.2425 days, which is the average length of a year in
the Gregorian calendar. This aligns the duration literal with the `years`
function and how the Tenzir Platform renders durations.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5110](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5110).

### Bug Fixes

#### Add optimizations for `if`

Operators that interact with state in the node that is not local to the
pipeline, e.g., `context::update`, now properly work when used inside an `if`
statement. Previously, pipelines of the form `if … { context::update … }` failed
at runtime.

Branches in `if` statement no longer run on a single thread, and instead
properly participate in the thread pool. This fixes performance problems when
running complex pipelines inside branches. Note that this causes the output of
the `if` operator to be unordered between its branches.

Literal values of type `time` in expressions failed to parse when they used
subsecond prevision or a time-zone offset. This no longer happens.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5110](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5110).
