---
title: Moving Fields
sidebar:
  badge:
    text: v5.1.0
    variant: success
---

Tenzir Node v5.1 adds more flexible ways to access and move fields, bitwise
functions, and a native integration with Google Cloud Logging.

Download the release on [GitHub](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/releases/tag/v5.1.0).

### Features

#### Experiment with a trailing `?` for field access

The `.?field` operator for field access with suppressed warnings is now
deprecated in favor of `.field?`. We added the `.?` operator just recently, and
it quickly gained a lot of popularity. However, suppressing warnings in
top-level fields required writing `this.?field`, which is a mouthful. Now, with
the trailing questionmark, this is just `field?` instead. Additionally, the
trailing `?` operator works for index-based access, e.g., `field[index]?`. The
`.?` operator will be removed in the near future. We're sorry for the
inconvenience.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5128](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5128).

#### Implement the `move` keyword

The `move` keyword may be used in front of fields anywhere in assignments to
automatically drop fields after the assignment. For example, `foo = {bar: move
bar, baz: move baz}` moves the top-level fields `bar` and `baz` into a new
record under the top-level field `foo`.

The `move`, `drop`, and `unroll` operators now support the `?` field access
notation to suppress warnings when the accessed field does not exist or the
parent record is `null`. For example, `drop foo?` only drops the field `foo` if
it exists, and does not warn if it doesn't. This also works with the newly
introduced `move` keyword.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5127](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5127).

#### Add a `split_at_regex` option to `read_lines`

We added a `split_at_regex` option allows for the use of regular expressions to
split events with the `read_lines` operator.

By [@tobim](https://github.com/tobim) in [#5123](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5123).

#### Implement `to_google_cloud_logging`

We added a `to_google_cloud_logging` operator that can send events to [Google
Cloud Logging](https://cloud.google.com/logging).

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5135](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5135).

#### Try and switch the Docker Image to `debian::trixie`

The `to_snowflake` operator is now available in the arm64 Docker image.

By [@IyeOnline](https://github.com/IyeOnline) in [#5113](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5113).

#### Expose Arrow's bit-wise compute functions

We added bit-wise functions to TQL, including `bit_and`, `bit_or`, `bit_xor`,
`bit_not`, `shift_left`, and `shift_right`. These functions enable performing
bit-level operations on numeric values.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5129](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5129).

### Changes

#### Assume UTF8 in `file_contents`

The `file_contents` function now returns contents as `string` by default.
Non-UTF-8 files can be read by specifying the `binary=true` option.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5135](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5135).

#### Try and switch the Docker Image to `debian::trixie`

The `tenzir/tenzir` and `tenzir/tenzir-node` Docker images now use
`debian:trixie-slim` instead of `debian:bookworm-slim` as a base image.

By [@IyeOnline](https://github.com/IyeOnline) in [#5113](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5113).

### Bug Fixes

#### Use a proper subpipeline for `fork`

Operators that interact with state in the node that is not local to the
pipeline, e.g., `context::update`, now properly work when used inside the nested
pipeline of the `fork` operator. Previously, pipelines of the form `fork {
context::update â€¦ }` failed at runtime.

By [@dominiklohmann](https://github.com/dominiklohmann) in [#5133](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5133).

#### Fix edge case when parsing nullable lists with type conflicts

Parsing of nullable lists with type conflicts could previously lead to an error
under very rare circumstances. This now works as expected.

By [@jachris](https://github.com/jachris) in [#5134](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5134).

#### Fix TLS options in `from_http`

We fixed a bug in parsing the TLS options for the `from_http` operator,
preventing disabling of TLS.

By [@raxyte](https://github.com/raxyte) in [#5135](https://github.com/tenzir/tenzir/pull/5135).
